CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to S-NES

Thank you for your interest in contributing! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to S-NES, a codebase dedicated to learning and development of NES, SNES, and Famicom systems and programming.

## Code of Conduct

This project adheres to a Code of Conduct that all contributors are expected to follow. Please read [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) before contributing.

## How to Contribute

### Reporting Bugs

If you find a bug or error in the documentation:

1. Check if the issue already exists in the [Issues](https://github.com/yourusername/nes-programming-knowledge-base/issues) section
2. If not, create a new issue with:
   - A clear, descriptive title
   - Steps to reproduce the issue
   - Expected vs actual behavior
   - Relevant section/page reference
   - Any additional context

### Suggesting Enhancements

We welcome suggestions for improvements:

1. Check existing issues to see if your idea has been discussed
2. Create a new issue with:
   - A clear description of the enhancement
   - Why it would be useful
   - How it fits with the project's goals
   - Examples or mockups if applicable

### Contributing Content

#### Documentation Updates

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create a branch** for your changes:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b fix/description-of-fix
   # or
   git checkout -b feature/description-of-feature
   ```
3. **Make your changes** following the project's style guidelines
4. **Test your changes** by reviewing the markdown rendering
5. **Commit your changes** with clear, descriptive commit messages
6. **Push to your fork** and create a Pull Request

#### Style Guidelines

- Follow the existing documentation structure
- Use hardware-accurate terminology
- Include code examples where appropriate
- Add cross-references to related sections
- Keep cheatsheets dense and table-focused
- Maintain the hardware-first philosophy

#### Content Structure

Each documentation file should include:

- Clear section headings
- Hardware-accurate explanations
- Code examples (when applicable)
- Cross-references to related sections
- Tables/diagrams for complex information

### Pull Request Process

1. **Update documentation** if your PR changes functionality
2. **Add yourself** to CONTRIBUTORS.md if this is your first contribution
3. **Ensure your PR**:
   - Follows the project's style guidelines
   - Includes appropriate cross-references
   - Maintains hardware accuracy
   - Has clear commit messages

4. **Wait for review** - maintainers will review your PR and may request changes

### Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/nes-programming-knowledge-base.git
   cd nes-programming-knowledge-base
   ```

2. Review the documentation structure in `docs/`

3. Make your changes following the guidelines above

### Areas for Contribution

- **Documentation improvements**: Clarifications, corrections, additional examples
- **New sections**: Expanding coverage of NES, SNES, and Famicom programming topics
- **SNES content**: Adding SNES-specific documentation and examples
- **Famicom content**: Documenting Famicom-specific features
- **Code examples**: Better or more comprehensive examples
- **Cheatsheets**: Additional reference tables or quick guides
- **Tooling**: Improvements to development workflow documentation
- **Real hardware**: Additional real hardware considerations for all systems

### Questions?

If you have questions about contributing, please:
- Open an issue with the `question` label
- Check existing issues and discussions
- Review the documentation in `docs/README.md`

Thank you for contributing to S-NES!

Commit message:

Almost done with the development framework but there are still errors in the syntax for all SNES codebase

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to S-NES-BOY

Thank you for your interest in contributing! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to S-NES-BOY, a codebase dedicated to learning and development of NES (Nintendo Entertainment System), SNES (Super Nintendo Entertainment System), and Game Boy systems and programming.

## Code of Conduct

This project adheres to a Code of Conduct that all contributors are expected to follow. Please read [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) before contributing.

## How to Contribute

### Reporting Bugs

If you find a bug or error in the documentation:

1. Check if the issue already exists in the [Issues](https://github.com/yourusername/s-nes-boy/issues) section
2. If not, create a new issue with:
   - A clear, descriptive title
   - Steps to reproduce the issue
   - Expected vs actual behavior
   - Relevant section/page reference
   - Any additional context

### Suggesting Enhancements

We welcome suggestions for improvements:

1. Check existing issues to see if your idea has been discussed
2. Create a new issue with:
   - A clear description of the enhancement
   - Why it would be useful
   - How it fits with the project's goals
   - Examples or mockups if applicable

### Contributing Content

#### Documentation Updates

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create a branch** for your changes:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b fix/description-of-fix
   # or
   git checkout -b feature/description-of-feature
   ```
3. **Make your changes** following the project's style guidelines
4. **Test your changes** by reviewing the markdown rendering
5. **Commit your changes** with clear, descriptive commit messages
6. **Push to your fork** and create a Pull Request

#### Style Guidelines

- Follow the existing documentation structure
- Use hardware-accurate terminology
- Include code examples where appropriate
- Add cross-references to related sections
- Keep cheatsheets dense and table-focused
- Maintain the hardware-first philosophy

#### Content Structure

Each documentation file should include:

- Clear section headings
- Hardware-accurate explanations
- Code examples (when applicable)
- Cross-references to related sections
- Tables/diagrams for complex information

### Pull Request Process

1. **Update documentation** if your PR changes functionality
2. **Add yourself** to CONTRIBUTORS.md if this is your first contribution
3. **Ensure your PR:
   - Follows the project's style guidelines
   - Includes appropriate cross-references
   - Maintains hardware accuracy
   - Has clear commit messages

4. **Wait for review** - maintainers will review your PR and may request changes

### Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/s-nes-boy.git
   cd s-nes-boy
   ```

2. Review the documentation structure in `nes-docs/` and `snes-docs/`

3. Make your changes following the guidelines above

### Areas for Contribution

- **Documentation improvements: Clarifications, corrections, additional examples
- **New sections: Expanding coverage of NES, SNES, and programming topics
- **SNES content: Adding SNES-specific documentation and examples
- ** content: Documenting -specific features
- **Code examples: Better or more comprehensive examples
- **Cheatsheets: Additional reference tables or quick guides
- **Tooling: Improvements to development workflow documentation
- **Real hardware: Additional real hardware considerations for all systems

### Questions?

If you have questions about contributing, please:
- Open an issue with the `question` label
- Check existing issues and discussions
- Review the documentation in `nes-docs/README.md` and `snes-docs/README.md`

Thank you for contributing to S-NES-BOY!
